RANGED COMBAT

Some characters are capable of ranged combat. When they shoot, the game determines if they hit or missed the target. Their accuracy is based on the base accuracy of their weapon and is reduced for each tile away from the shooter by 5%. Note that targets standing in the neighboring tile will always be hit regardless of accuracy.

Missing bullets tend to disperse around the target, the farther the target - the greater the dispersion. This means that you can hit some passer-by standing near your target (this is especially true for machine-gunners who have decreased accuracy and can shoot six bullets at once).

Once the bullet's destination is determined, it flies to it until it hits an obstacle. Note that certain terrain tiles (like windows) provide a line of sight but block any line of fire, so you will always miss whenever you try to shoot through a window.


ARMOR VS DAMAGE

Whenever weapon damage is applied, the game checks the target's resistances to this damage type. Resistances are subdivided into two parts - direct resistances and percentage resistances.

First, the amount of damage is reduced flatly by the amount of direct resistance (for example, 4 points of iron damage against 1 point of direct iron resistance makes 3). Then the result is further reduced by the percentage resistance, with the final damage amount rounded down (for example, 3 points of iron damage against 50% iron resistance makes 1.5, rounded down to 1). This final damage is applied to the target. 

Note that only weapon damage is mitigated by armor. Other sources of damage (like burns from blessings) are applied directly to target's hit points.


MOUNTED COMBAT

Some units (horses and fiends) move in a special way - they have momentum. That means they have speed and direction where they move. The following rules apply:
 - If a unit starts to move in a certain direction, it gains speed. 
 - If a unit skips a turn, it will continue to move in the chosen direction. 
 - If a unit tries to move in the opposite direction, it will lose speed. 
 - If a unit tries to move sideways at high speed, it will change direction somewhat but will lose speed at the same time. 
Maximum speed is limited to 2 (that means that if a horse has the speed of 2, it will cover 2 tiles in the chosen direction during its turn).

If a unit with momentum hits an obstacle it will lose its speed completely and try to push the obstacle in the direction of its movement. While walls and other terrain features can not be pushed, other units are movable. If the pushed unit belongs to another faction, it will be also attacked.

Units with momentum may also be used as mounts. All demons may mount fiends, and all military units (except machine-gunners) may mount horses. This will provide the benefits of a unit with momentum while allowing the rider to engage in other activities (for example, once a scout has gained speed, he will be able to shoot his target while continuing to move in the chosen direction). Mounts also serve as meatshields as the attacker has a 50% chance to attack the mount instead of the rider.

Note however that engaging in combat while mounted invokes a 20% accuracy penalty to ranged attacks.


MULTI-TILE CREATURES

Some units (a Gargantaur) are so huge that they occupy several tiles on the level. This implies the following:
 - They will not be able to get into narrow spaces (like some streets or the inside of the houses).
 - They are much easier to be hit with ranged weapons (even if the bullets disperse, this are still likely to land on a tile which the creature occupies).
 - They are able to move only in the direction they face (unlike smaller creatures). So if they first move south and then want to go north, it will require of them to make a 180-degree turn.
 - They can melee attack several enemies at the same time. For example, a Gargantaur of size 3x3 can crush up to 3 units standing next to it.
 
Multi-tile units may also serve as mounts (for example, Angels can dominate Gargantaurs). Riding one will give excellent protection against melee attacks, but you will still have to cope with the creature's size and the necessity to turn it around to move in the desired direction.


GRAVITY

When you step into a tile with no floor in it (like empty air), you will fall down until you hit something solid. If the distance that you have traveled while falling is more than 1 Z level, you will take 5 damage for each level beyond 1. Falling into water will not lessen the damage.


STEALTH

Stealth is an ability to render oneself invisible to others. Your visibility is determined by two components - the amount of light that falls on you and the amount of motion you make. Every light source produces a certain amount of light that is distributed around it. The farther the tile - the less light it will receive. Some characters (like citizens, military units, and the Angels) are their own light sources and illuminate themselves and everything around them. 
Characters also become more visible the more they move. Every action produces a certain amount of motion that is added to the unit's visibility. Some actions produce more motion (like attacking somebody in melee), some - less (like picking or dropping items), but you generate no motion only if you stand completely still.
A unit becomes visible to others if its visibility reaches 50. That means that if you are not specifically keen on stealth, you will be quite easily detected if you move, especially if even a little bit of light is shed on your location.


TIME OF DAY

There is a dynamic change of the time of day on the level. All outdoor tiles (that is all tiles that do not have a solid floor above them) will have their inherent lighting cycle in synch with the current time - from 0 light at midnight to 100 light at noon.
That means that you will not be able to hide in the streets during the day.


HEARING

Apart from motion, every character action also produces sounds that others can hear. If you do not see the source of the sound you will be indicated the general direction to it and the nature of the sound. Some actions are very loud (like gun shots), others won't be heard unless you stand nearby (like somebody's moving). Sounds are able to propagate through walls but they lose their loudness while doing so.
When hearing something, most characters will try to investigate the source of the sound if they have no other pressing matters.


CLIMBING

The Thief is the only character who can traverse space vertically practically anywhere he wants. To climb up or down, he needs to be in the climbing mode, be positioned next to a wall or a floor and his destination tile should also have a wall or a floor tile nearby. This means that some bushes or trees may not be climbable as they lack a floor above them that the Thief can cling to. 
Note that if you decide to switch off the climbing mode while having no solid floor in the tile you find yourself, you will immediately drop down.
This ability provides the Thief with unprecedented protection as nobody will be able to follow him if he decides to get up on a roof (but some will be able to shoot him there nonetheless).  


WATER

All characters are able to swim. You can traverse water horizontally and swim directly up and down. To get onto the shore, move against a wall with a floor above it while inside a lake or a river.
Swimming takes more time than walking so jumping straight into a lake for a shortcut might not always be a good idea.
Remember that humans need to breathe. Your oxygen supply will start to diminish when you are in the water and there is no air tile directly above you. Once you are out of oxygen, you will start to take damage and will eventually die.