STAIRS & SLOPES

The game does not really have stairs, only ramps. 
You go up a ramp you need to have the following conditions met:
- on your Z level in the direction, you want to move there is a terrain obstacle that blocks movement,
- you are standing on a slope up,
- on the Z level above you, the tile in the direction of your movement is empty.
The resulting movement will take you upstairs.


GRAVITY

When you step into a tile with no floor in it (like empty air), you will fall down until you hit something solid. If the distance that you have traveled while falling is more than 1 Z level, you will take 5 damage for each level beyond 1. Falling into water will not lessen the damage.


STEALTH

Stealth is an ability to render oneself invisible to others. Your visibility is determined by two components - the amount of light that falls on you and the amount of motion you make. Every light source produces a certain amount of light that is distributed around it. The farther the tile - the less light it will receive. Some characters (like citizens, military units, and the Angels) are their own light sources and illuminate themselves and everything around them. 
Characters also become more visible the more they move. Every action produces a certain amount of motion that is added to the unit's visibility. Some actions produce more motion (like attacking somebody in melee), some - less (like picking or dropping items), but you generate no motion only if you stand completely still.
A unit becomes visible to others if its visibility reaches 50. That means that if you are not specifically keen on stealth, you will be quite easily detected if you move, especially if even a little bit of light is shed on your location.


TIME OF DAY

There is a dynamic change of the time of day on the level. All outdoor tiles (that is all tiles that do not have a solid floor above them) will have their inherent lighting cycle in synch with the current time - from 0 light at midnight to 100 light at noon.
That means that you will not be able to hide in the streets during the day.


HEARING

Apart from motion, every character action also produces sounds that others can hear. If you do not see the source of the sound you will be indicated the general direction to it and the nature of the sound. Some actions are very loud (like gunshots), others won't be heard unless you stand nearby (like somebody's moving). Sounds are able to propagate through walls but they lose their loudness while doing so.
When hearing something, most characters will try to investigate the source of the sound if they have no other pressing matters.
Sounds are indicated as question marks on the map. Note that you are unable to pinpoint the source of the sound with 100% accuracy.


CLIMBING

The Thief is the only character who can traverse space vertically practically anywhere he wants. To climb up or down, he needs to be in the climbing mode, be positioned next to a wall or a floor and his destination tile should also have a wall or a floor tile nearby. This means that some bushes or trees may not be climbable as they lack a floor above them that the Thief can cling to. 
Note that if you decide to switch off the climbing mode while having no solid floor in the tile you find yourself, you will immediately drop down.
This ability provides the Thief with unprecedented protection as nobody will be able to follow him if he decides to get up on a roof (but some will be able to shoot him there nonetheless).  


WATER

All characters are able to swim. You can traverse water horizontally and swim directly up and down. To get onto the shore, move against a wall with a floor above it while inside a lake or a river.
Swimming takes more time than walking so jumping straight into a lake for a shortcut might not always be a good idea.
Remember that humans need to breathe. Your oxygen supply will start to diminish when you are in the water and there is no air tile directly above you. Once you are out of oxygen, you will start to take damage and will eventually die.
Staying in water makes you wet. Being wet gives you 25% fire resistance.


FLYING

Avatars of Brilliance and wisps are able to fly directly up and down (as well as the usual horizontal movement). But beware that once the Avatar's transformation is over, you will fall and have to suffer full effects of gravity.
Wisps, on the other hand, may fly indefinitely.